Document operator client CRDs supported by Admin API v2 (#49775)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/guides/operator/managing-clients.adoc

== Managing OIDC and SAML clients with the Operator

<#-- TODO: per docs/features.md, experimental features should link to a GitHub Discussion in the Feedback category. Coordinate with PR #48001 (Admin API v2 docs) to create a shared Discussion. -->
<#include "/templates/experimental-feature.adoc">

The {project_name} Operator can manage OIDC and SAML clients declaratively through Custom Resources.
The operator creates, updates, and deletes clients on the {project_name} server to match the desired state defined in the CR.

[WARNING]
====
Do not modify operator-managed clients through the Admin UI or API, including server-side client secret rotation.
The operator does not detect external changes and will overwrite them.
A future release will introduce resource ownership controls that prevent such modifications automatically.
====

=== Prerequisites

The following must be in place before creating client CRs.

==== Enable the Client Admin API feature

The `client-admin-api:v2` feature must be enabled on the {project_name} server.
For more details about this API, see the <@links.adminapi id="admin-api-v2"/> guide.

> Add it to the Keycloak CR:

Author: Would be better to show the same format that is used for the enablement in guides rather than the other way around. I found assertion `ERROR: Feature openapi depends on disabled feature client-admin-api-v2` so it has a point in general. I'll keep it as is.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: k8s.keycloak.org/v2beta1
kind: Keycloak
metadata:
  name: example-kc
spec:
  features:
    enabled:
      - client-admin-api:v2
  ...
----

==== Configure the admin credentials

The operator authenticates to {project_name} using the client credentials flow against the `master` realm.
It reads credentials from a Kubernetes Secret named `<keycloak-cr-name>-admin` in the same namespace, which must contain `client-id` and `client-secret` keys.
This Secret must be created manually as part of the bootstrap admin setup.
For setup details, see the Admin Bootstrapping section in the <@links.operator id="advanced-configuration"/> guide.

> A future release may simplify this by automating the credential setup.

Author: > WThe docs state the operator reads credentials from <keycloak-cr-name>-admin, but they don’t mention that the Keycloak instance must also be bootstrapped to create a service account client 

I imagine that users may already have client with the secret in master realm, or create it in Admin UI. Using `spec.bootstrapAdmin.service.secret` is a way to create a new service account, which may not be necessary. It is not strictly necessary to create a new SA.

> Without that, the Secret alone won’t make the client credentials valid for authenticating to the master realm.

That is supposed to be explained in the linked details https://www.keycloak.org/operator/advanced-configuration#_admin_bootstrapping.

==== Mutual TLS

If {project_name} <@links.server id="mutual-tls">requires client certificates</@links.server>, two additional configurations are needed on the Keycloak CR:

* `spec.admin.tlsSecret` — name of a Kubernetes TLS Secret containing the operator's client certificate and private key (`tls.crt` and `tls.key`).

> * `spec.truststores` — {project_name} must trust the operator's client certificate. Add the corresponding CA certificate to the Keycloak CR's truststores. See the Truststores section in the <@links.operator id="advanced-configuration"/> guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If {project_name} <@links.server id="mutual-tls">requires client certificates</@links.server>
`spec.admin.tlsSecret` is used to provide the name of a Kubernetes TLS Secret containing the operator's client certificate and private key (`tls.crt` and `tls.key`), which must be trusted by the server.
```

Using spec.truststores for the http server trust isn't desirable until the changes from https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/issues/48412 are manditory - as that will restrict the authentication to only specific CAs. I don't think the mutual auth guide was updated to describe when you could use spec.truststores. 

Nor was an issue created to re-deprecate the https-truststore (and there's one for the management interface as well) - or perhaps we don't even want to do this if it's being used for basic access control and not authentication.

cc @vmuzikar

Long-story short - I was using spec.truststores in the test because we never added operator support for https://www.keycloak.org/server/mutual-tls#_using_a_dedicated_truststore_for_mtls - to set the https-truststore users will generally need to use the unsupported pod template to mount a Secret.

Author: I understand the explanation, thanks for the context. Yes, I took it from your test and now that I am looking where `spec.truststores` is used, it is used for all SPIs using `org.keycloak.truststore.TruststoreProvider`, which I missed.

Documenting it your way reminds me one Czech fairy tale _Královna Koloběžka První_, but since you cannot know it I'll simply apply your suggestion.

Reviewer: Can't say that I'm familiar with that one :(

Let's capture some kind of follow-up based upon #48412 about what we want to do with the https-truststore.

        key: client-secret-key # <2>
----
<1> Name of the Kubernetes Secret in the same namespace.
<2> Key within the Secret that holds the client secret value.

If the referenced Secret does not exist, the CR will report a `HasErrors` status condition.
When the value in the Kubernetes Secret changes, the operator detects the change within its polling interval and updates the client on the {project_name} server.

=== Checking Client Status

To check the status of a client CR:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl get keycloakoidcclients/my-oidc-app -o go-template='{{range .status.conditions}}CONDITION: {{.type}}{{"\n"}}  STATUS: {{.status}}{{"\n"}}  MESSAGE: {{.message}}{{"\n"}}{{end}}'
----

When the client has been created successfully:

[source]
----
CONDITION: HasErrors
  STATUS: false
  MESSAGE:
----

Common error causes include a missing `client-admin-api:v2` feature, a missing secret reference, or the {project_name} server not being ready.
The operator retries the operation periodically until it succeeds.

=== Updating a Client

To update a client, modify the `spec.client` fields in the CR and re-apply:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl apply -f my-oidc-client.yaml
----

> The manifest must include all `spec.client` fields, not just the changed ones.

Author: I don't entirely agree, but I rewrote sentence to avoid misinterpretation regarding `all fields`.
